You can further sign up for our newsletter via Facebook. For this purpose, we are using Facebook Lead Ads, a service by Facebook Inc., 1601 South California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304 U.S. ("Facebook"). Lead Ads makes it even easier for you to sign up for our newsletter as the form will already be pre-populated via Facebook with your data and you only need to submit the form. Of course, you have the opportunity to amend and review the data before submission. For more information on how lead ads works see here - https://www.facebook.com/business/ads/lead-ads.
If you sign up for editorial newsletters on Facebook and consent to receiving marketing emails or Facebook advertisements, you may or may not receive Facebook advertisements about products or services from Scientific American.
If you reside in the EU please be aware that your personal data will be transferred back to Facebook to facilitate advertisements. Facebook processes this data also in countries outside of the EU where a different level of data protection applies and access to the data by authorities and public bodies is possible. With your consent, you also agree to the transfer to Facebook in third countries, including the USA.
The legal basis for this processing is Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR. Your email address will be retained as long as you subscribe to our newsletters.
You can unsubscribe from this service by opting out via the link provided in each newsletter. If you inquired about a product or service and no longer wish to be contacted, you can email onlineservice@springernature.com,  citing the name of the product or service, and request that your email address be removed.
4. Nature Conferences
Springer Nature America, Inc. (“SNAI”) [1 New York Plaza, Suite 4500, New York, NY 10004-1562, USA] and for China, Macmillan Information Consulting Services (Shanghai Co. Ltd) [10-11unit, 42 Floor, The Center, 
989 Changle Road, XuHui District, 200031 Shanghai, CHINA], affiliates of Springer Nature Limited (together “Springer Nature entities”), collect personal data from attendees to Nature conferences to facilitate registration and plan for the events. This includes data categories such as: Identification data (which may include name, address, telephone number, email address), entity type (e.g. academic, government, industry), position titles, curriculum vitaes, professional license information, dietary requirements, gender, information for travel arrangements (i.e., passport data, date of birth) and payment information. We also request information relating to requirements for reasonable accommodation where physical assistance may be needed to attend. We may collect data through a third party vendor such as Eventsforce Solutions Ltd.
Eventsforce act as a data processor on our behalf. The use of your personal data in relation to conference attendance is based on Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. b GDPR and Art. 9 sec. 2 lit. a GDPR with regard to all health-related information you share with us in order to enable us to provide the required physical assistance to you.
With the consent of attendees, we may use personal data, specifically identification data such as name and email address, to share information with attendees about future Nature conferences or other products, services and special offers. We’ll continue to send you information and store your data until you ask us to be removed. This notification service is based on your consent, Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR.
VI. Automated decision making
We do not use your personal data for automated decision making which produces legal effects concerning you or similarly significantly affects you, however we do use your personal data to offer you content and services which we believe may be of interest.
VII. Online advertising, e-commerce and related tools
We use marketing services to provide you with interesting offers. For this purpose, we place advertisements via advertising service providers that use cookies and/or web beacons that are activated when you visit our website. Cookies are small text files that are stored locally in the internet browser and allow recognition of a user. Web beacons are small image files, which allow log file recording and log file analysis. To present online advertising we use the services of, inter alia, Google AdExchange, Google AdSens, Microsoft Advertising. Respective advertisement is labelled as “ADVERTISEMENT” or “AdChoices”. 
The cookies and web beacons enable our service providers to collect information about you and your surfing behaviour, e.g. IP address, browser information, information on user activities and click data, and to recognize visitors to our website under a pseudonym and only display products that are likely to be of interest to our visitors. Most of the tools use pseudonymised or aggregated data, e.g. shortened IP addresses. The data is used to analyse the use of our website and, thereby, improve and optimize the website and to display advertising tailored to your needs. We collect this data (to improve your website experience and to promote our products and services). You can update your preferences via the “Use of cookies/Do not sell my data” link in the page footer.
Personal data collected via first party cookies is based on consent, Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR, to improve your website experience and promote our products and services. We collect this data via a cookie management tool; you can update your preferences via the “Use of cookies/Do not sell my data” link in the page footer.     
Personal data collected via third party targeting cookies is based on your consent, Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR. You can update your preferences via the “Use of cookies/Do not sell my data” link in the page footer.     
Please note that we neither have the control of the extent of personal data that is collected by the respective plug-in provider nor do we know the processing’s purpose or the period your personal data will be retained. Your personal data will be transferred to and processed inside and outside of the EEA. For further information about the potential risks of a cross border data transfer refer to XI.
It is possible that the above providers may disclose your personal data to its business partners, third parties or authorities.
