You can prevent the installation of such a cookie (i) by a respective setting of your browser that blocks the installation of third party cookies, (ii) by deactivating the interest-related advertising under https://adssettings.google.com/authenticated, (iii) generally blocking cookies under https://support.google.com/ads/answer/7395996 or (iv) by deselecting the option for tracking cookies via the Springer Nature cookie preference centre.
Further information about the processing of your personal data in the provider’s course of operation is provided by its privacy policy. Moreover, you will be provided with further information with regard to your rights and settings concerning privacy. You can access the provider’s privacy policy by following these links:
Yahoo 
Twitter 
Facebook 
Criteo
Google AdExchange 
Google AdSense 
Oracle MOAT 
Google Ad Manager 
Brightcom
Rubicon Project
Pubmatic  
Appnexus
Permutive
Microsoft Advertising
Baynote
CJ Affiliate
Hotjar
Marvellous Machine
SAP Marketing Cloud
Google AdWords Remarketing
In this website, we use the remarketing or “Similar audiences” feature of AdWords offered by Google Inc., 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA, hereinafter referred to as “Google”
Google uses cookies/tracking technologies, i.e., text files that are stored on your computer and that allow us to analyze your use of our website. Information generated by Cookies/tracking technology on your use of this website (including your IP address) will be transferred to a Google server in the U.S. and stored on that server. After that, the last three digits of the IP address will be deleted by Google so that it is no longer possible to clearly match this IP address with personal data. Google will use this information to analyze your use of the website, to create website activity reports for the website operators and to provide additional services in connection with the use of the website and the internet. Furthermore, Google may transfer this information to third parties, if it is required to do so in accordance with statutory provisions or if third parties process data on behalf of Google.
Third party providers, including Google, place advertisements on websites on the internet. Third party providers, including Google, use stored cookies/tracking information to place advertisements based on previous visits of a user on this website.
For additional information on the anonymous analysis of your search behavior please refer to:
•	https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6004245?hl=de
•	http://www.google.com/policies/technologies/ads/
You may object to data collection and storage for the purpose of remarketing at any time - this objection will be effective for the future, but not retroactively - by deactivating interest-based advertising in Google or by deactivating the services on the website of the Network Advertising Initiative. Note: in that case, you may not be able to use all features of this website anymore. By using this website, you grant your consent to the processing of data collected about you by Google in the manner and for the purpose described above.
Facebook Custom Audience
This Website uses retargeting tags and Custom Audience of Facebook Inc., 1601 South California Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304 U.S., hereinafter referred to as “Facebook”.
When you visit our web pages, remarketing tags will build a direct connection between your browser and the Facebook server. This way, Facebook learns that you have visited our web page with your IP address. This will enable Facebook to match your visit of our pages with your user account. The information obtained this way can be used to display Facebook ads. Please note that we as the provider of the webpages do not receive any information on the contents of data transferred and their use by Facebook.
With regard to the use of Custom Audience we would like to point out that Facebook and third parties use cookies, web beacons or similar technologies to collect or gather information on this website. Based on the data gained we can make our Facebook activities more efficient and, e.g., arrange for contents or ads to be shown only to visitors of our website. The data collected this way will encrypted and transferred to Facebook and is anonymous for us, e.g., we cannot see personal data of individual users.
We may also utilise other tools, such as Permutive, to build anonymous behavioural segments, and pass the status of membership of these segment(s) into the Facebook cookie. This will enable membership of these segments to be used when building Custom Audiences within Facebook.
For further information on the privacy policy of Facebook and Custom Audience please refer to https://www.facebook.com/about/privacy/ or https://www.facebook.com/business/a/online-sales/custom-audiences-website.
If you do not wish your data to be collected via Custom Audience, you can deactivate custom Audience using this link.
ResearchGate
You can sign up for products and services via ResearchGate. For this purpose, we are using ResearchGate OnSite Lead Collection, a service by ResearchGate GmbH, Chausseestr. 20, 10115 Berlin, Germany ("ResearchGate"). OnSite Lead Collection makes it even easier for you to sign up for products and services as the form will already be pre-populated via ResearchGate with your data and you only need to submit the form. Of course, you have the opportunity to amend and review the data before submission. For more information on how on-site lead collection works see here - https://solutions.researchgate.net/advertising/, with link to the privacy policy here.
The legal basis for this processing is Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR. Your email address will be retained as long as you request our products and services, or until you request the removal of your email address. 
You can unsubscribe by opting out via the link provided in each newsletter. You can also email onlineservice@springernature.com, citing the name of the product or service, and request that your email address be removed. 
VIII. Analytics
OneTrust
We use Onetrust, a service provided by OneTrust LLC, Dixon House, 1 Lloyd's Avenue, London, EC3N 3DQ (“Onetrust”). We use Onetrust services to provide information about the cookies and other tracking technology used on our website and to manage user preferences on that behalf.
Onetrust places the following cookies on your computer:
OptanonAlert, OptanonConsent, _dc_gtm_UA-xxxxxxxx 
This allows us to identify if the cookie banner is displayed, which choices you made and how to act upon those choices (Opt-in or Opt-out of cookie categories). These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences. To review your current settings please go to our Privacy Preference Centre. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.
You can set your browser to block these cookies, but some parts of the site may then not perform as designed.
For more information about privacy policies and Onetrust, please refer to the Onetrust website: https://Onetrust.com/privacy-notice/.
For statistical analyses we use web analytics services such as Google Analytics, collect information about the use of this site.
General tracking information
The tools collect information such as:
- Device and browser information (operating system information, Mobile device identifier, mobile operating system, etc.)
- IP address
- Page accessed, URL click stream (the chronological order of our internet sites you visited)
- Geographic location
- Time of visit
- Referring site, application, or service
We use the information we get from the providers only to determine the most useful information you are looking for, and to improve and optimize this website. 
We will track your behaviour online for the purposes described above; this data will not be shared outside of Springer Nature. You can stop this tracking using our Privacy Preference Centre. The legal basis for this processing via Google Analytics is consent, Art. 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit.a GDPR, to analyse our website’s traffic, improve the user’s experience and optimise the website in general.
We do not share information on your web behaviour with any 3rd party providers without your explicit consent. Consent is provided by clicking the appropriate button on the web banner that appears on your first visit to the website. You can update or withdraw your consent by visiting our Privacy Preference Centre. The legal basis for this processing is Art. 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. a GDPR and represents you consent to accepting 3rd party targeting cookies.
Depending on the provider the information generated about your use of the website may be transferred to and processed in third countries, e.g. the United States. For further information about the potential risks of a cross border data transfer please refer to section XI. The tools collect only the IP address assigned to you on the date you visit this site, rather than your name or any other identifying information. The provider will use this information in order to evaluate your use of the website, to compile reports on website activities and to provide other services relating to website and internet use to us.
Google Analytics 
We use Google Analytics, a web analytics service provided by Google LLC, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA (“Google”). On our behalf Google will use the information generated by a cookie for the purpose of evaluating your use of the website, compiling reports on website activity and providing other services relating to website activity and internet activity in connection with the use of the website and according to your consent preferences. You can access the Google Analytics privacy policy here.
The legal basis for the data transfer is Art. 28 GDPR in conjunction with the data processing agreement.
You may refuse the use of cookies by selecting the appropriate settings on your browser or by amending your preferences. In addition to that you may prevent the collection of the information generated by the cookie about your use of the website (including you IP address) and the processing of this data by Google if you download and install the browser 
plug-in available at the following link: http://tools.google.com/dlpage/gaoptout
IX. Third party content, social media plugins
This website may contain links to third party websites. We are not responsible for the content and the data collection on respective third party websites; please check the privacy policy of respective websites for information of respective websites’ data processing activities.
1. Social Media plug-ins
We use the following social media plug-ins: Facebook, Twitter. This allows you to communicate with such services and like or comment from our website. Social media plug-ins enable a direct communication between your device and the servers of the social media provider, allowing the social media provider to communicate with you and collect information about you browsing our website. This processing is based on Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. f GDPR and represents our legitimate interest to improve your website experience and to optimise our services.
Transfer of personal data takes place whether you have an account with the provider or not. 
Please note that we neither have the control of the extent of personal data that is collected by the respective plug-in provider nor do we know the processing’s purpose or the period your personal data will be retained. 
Further information about the processing of your personal data in the provider’s course of operation is provided via their respective privacy policy. Moreover, you will be provided with further information with regard to your rights and setting concerning privacy. 
a. Facebook Social plugins
We use so-called social plugins („plugins“) of the social networking site facebook.com provided by Facebook Inc., 1601 S. California Ave, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA ("Facebook"). The plugins can be identified by one of Facebook’s logos (white “f” on blue tile or a “thumps-up”-sign) or by the additional text “Facebook Social Plugin”. The list of Facebook Social Plugins and their appearance can be accessed via: http://developers.facebook.com/plugins. 
If a user visits one of the websites using such a plugin, the user’s browser directly connects to Facebook’s servers. The plugin and its content are made available directly on Facebook’s servers and included in the website by the user’s browser. 
Due to the integration of the plugin Facebook collects the information that a user is visiting the corresponding website. If the user is logged in on Facebook at the moment he or she visits the website, Facebook may be able to connect the visit on the website to the user’s Facebook account.