This information does not contain anything related to a personal login unless,you are a nominated administrator for that organization or your organization specifically requires it as a part of a usage-based access contract.
The personal data automatically collected is necessary for us to provide the website, Article 6 sec. Registration for our services
Access to subscription content is provided via a variety of mechanisms such as IP site licenses, login via third party federated identity providers or by an personal account with us. A personal account is required to purchase content directly from us, or to receive personal services like newsletters and alerts.
If you need to create a personal login with us then we will store and process the Information as your name, user name and email address that is provided by registration , Information in connection with an account sign-in facility and Communications sent by you.
We will process the personal data you provide to.For this, the legal basis is Article 6 sec. The use of your personal data for behavioural advertising and profiling is done with consent, Article 6 sec.
We use the personal data and contact data you provide by registration to inform you directly about our additional products and services. The use of your personal data for directly advertising related products and services is with consent, Article 6 sec. This notification service is based on your consent, Article 6 sec.
Registration data is kept until such time as an account deletion request is made. Information about the specific uses that require registration
In addition to the extent of processing described under IV, when you post a comment we will retain some of your personal data such as your IP address and name and other metadata such as time of posting. This is necessary to defend ourselves from possible liability claims that may arise from unlawful comments posted by you and reflects our legitimate interest with regard to the legal justification of this processing activity in Article 6 sec.
Your customer account retains your personal data for future purchases.