Lead Ads makes it even easier for you to sign up for our newsletter as the form will already be pre-populated via Facebook with your data and you only need to submit the form.
If you sign up for editorial newsletters on Facebook and consent to receiving marketing emails or Facebook advertisements, you may or may not receive Facebook advertisements about products or services from Scientific American.
If you reside in the EU please be aware that your personal data will be transferred back to Facebook to facilitate advertisements, collect personal data from attendees to Nature conferences to facilitate registration and plan for the events. The use of your personal data in relation to conference attendance is based on Article 6 sec. a GDPR with regard to all health-related information you share with us in order to enable us to provide the required physical assistance to you.
With the consent of attendees, we may use personal data, specifically identification data such as name and email address, to share information with attendees about future Nature conferences or other products, services and special offers. This notification service is based on your consent, Article 6 sec. Online advertising, e-commerce and related tools
We use marketing services to provide you with interesting offers. For this purpose, we place advertisements via advertising service providers that use cookies and/or web beacons that are activated when you visit our website.
The cookies and web beacons enable our service providers to collect information about you and your surfing behaviour, e.g. IP address, browser information, information on user activities and click data, and to recognize visitors to our website under a pseudonym and only display products that are likely to be of interest to our visitors. We collect this data (to improve your website experience and to promote our products and services).
Personal data collected via first party cookies is based on consent, Article 6 sec. a GDPR, to improve your website experience and promote our products and services.
Personal data collected via third party targeting cookies is based on your consent, Article 6 sec.