You can access the provider`s privacy policy by following these links
Yahoo,Twitter,Facebook,Criteo etc. 
Google AdWords Remarketing
In this website, we use the remarketing or “Similar audiences” feature of AdWords offered by Google Inc., 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA 94043 USA, hereinafter referred to as “Google”
Google uses cookies/tracking technologies, i.e., text files that are stored on your computer and that allow us to analyze your use of our website. Information generated by Cookies/tracking technology on your use of this website (including your IP address) will be transferred to a Google server in the U.S. and stored on that server. Google will use this information to analyze your use of the website, to create website activity reports for the website operators and to provide additional services in connection with the use of the website and the internet. Third party providers, including Google, use stored cookies/tracking information to place advertisements based on previous visits of a user on this website.
For additional information on the anonymous analysis of your search behavior please refer to:
• https://support.google.com/analytics/answer/6004245?hl=de
• http://www.google.com/policies/technologies/ads/
You may object to data collection and storage for the purpose of remarketing at any time - this objection will be effective for the future, but not retroactively - by deactivating interest-based advertising in Google or by deactivating the services on the website of the Network Advertising Initiative. By using this website, you grant your consent to the processing of data collected about you by Google in the manner and for the purpose described above. Please note that we as the provider of the webpages do not receive any information on the contents of data transferred and their use by Facebook.
With regard to the use of Custom Audience we would like to point out that Facebook and third parties use cookies, web beacons or similar technologies to collect or gather information on this website. For more information on how on-site lead collection works see here - https://solutions.researchgate.net/advertising/, with link to the privacy policy here. We use Onetrust services to provide information about the cookies.We use the following social media plug-ins: Facebook, Twitter. This allows you to communicate with such services and like or comment from our website. Social media plug-ins enable a direct communication between your device and the servers of the social media provider, allowing the social media provider to communicate with you and collect information about you browsing our website. This processing is based on Article 6 sec. 1 sent. 1 lit. f GDPR and represents our legitimate interest to improve your website experience and to optimise our services. 
 Transfer of personal data takes place whether you have an account with the provider or not. Further information about the processing of your personal data in the provider’s course of operation is provided via their respective privacy policy. Moreover, you will be provided with further information with regard to your rights and setting concerning privacy