Information generated by Cookies/tracking technology on your use of Google will be transferred to a Google server in the U.S. and stored on that server. Google may transfer this information to third parties, if it is required to do so in accordance with statutory provisions.Users may object to data collection and storage for the purpose of remarketing at any time which will be effective for the future. By deactivating interest-based advertising in Google or by deactivating the services on the website of the Network Advertising Initiative users may not be able to use all features of this website anymore.

When you visit facebook web pages, remarketing tags will build a direct connection between your browser and the Facebook server. If users do not wish your data to be collected via Custom Audience, you can deactivate custom Audience using this link.

Users can sign up for products using ResearchGate. ResearchGate OnSite Lead Collection helps users to sign up for products and services.Users email address will be retained as long as users request our products or services until users explicitly request the removal of their email address.

Onetrust services are used to provide information about the cookies and other tracking technology used on our website and to manage user preferences on that behalf.Onetrust places some cookies on users computer. These cookies allow us to identify if the cookie banner is displayed, which choices users made and how to act upon those choices. Users can set their browser to block these cookies, but some parts of the site may then not perform as designed

Google analytics is used to evaluate the use of websites. Google will use the information generated by a cookie for the purpose of evaluating your use of the website. Users may refuse the use of cookies by selecting the appropriate settings on their browser or by amending your preferences.

We use social media plugins which allows us to communicate with such services and like or comment from our website. Social media plug-ins enable a direct communication between users device and the servers of the social media provider, allowing the social media provider to communicate with you and collect information about you browsing our website.