Joining me now to discuss all this is Sean Carroll, a theoretical physicist who hosts his own podcast, Mindscape. Sean spent years as a research professor of physics at Caltech [California Institute of Technology], but he is now moving to Johns Hopkins as the Homewood Professor of Natural Philosophy. He’s also an external professor at the Santa Fe Institute. But no matter where he is, Sean studies deep questions about quantum
mechanics, gravity, time and cosmology. He’s the author of several books, including his most recent, Something Deeply Hidden: Quantum Worlds and the Emergence of Spacetime. Sean, thank you so much for joining us today.
Sean Carroll (02:54): Thanks very much for having me, Steve.
Strogatz (02:56): It’s very exciting to me to be talking with the master of emergent space-time. Really mind-boggling stuff, I enjoyed your book very much. I hope you can help us make some sense of these really thorny and fascinating issues in, I’d say, at the frontiers of physics today.
Why are you guys, you physicists, worrying so much about space and time again? I thought Einstein took care of that for us a long time ago. What’s really missing?
Carroll (03:21): Yeah, you know, we think of relativity, the birth of relativity in the early 20th century, as a giant revolution in physics. But it was nothing compared to the quantum revolution that happened a few years later. Einstein helped the beginning of special relativity, which is the theory that says you can’t move faster than the speed of light, everything is measured relative to everything else in terms of velocities and positions and so forth. But still, there was no gravity in special relativity. That was 1905. And then 10 years later, after a lot of skull sweat and heavy lifting, Einstein came up with general relativity, where, he had been trying to put in gravity to special relativity, and he realized he needed a whole new approach, which was to let space-time be curved, to have a geometry, to be dynamical. It’s the fabric of space-time itself that responds to energy and mass, and that’s what we perceive as gravity.
(04:14) And as revolutionary as all that was, sort of replacing fundamental ideas that had come from Isaac Newton, both special relativity and general relativity were still fundamentally classical theories. You know, we sometimes prevaricate about the word “classical,” but usually what physicists mean is, the basic framework set down by Isaac Newton in which you have stuff, whether it’s particles or fields, or whatever. And that stuff is characterized by what it is, where it is, and then how it’s moving. So for a particle, that would be its position and its velocity, right? And then, from that, you can predict everything, and you can observe everything and it’s precise and it’s deterministic, and this gives us what we call the clockwork universe, right? You can predict everything. If you knew perfect information about the whole world, you would be what we call “Laplace’s demon,” and you’d be able to precisely predict the future and the past.
(05:08) But even general relativity, which says that space-time is curved, that still falls into that framework. It’s still a classical theory. And we all knew, once quantum mechanics came along, circa 1927, let’s say. It was bubbling up from 1900, and then sort of — it triumphed in 1927, at a famous conference, the fifth Solvay Conference, where Einstein and Bohr argued about what it all meant.
(05:32) But since then, we’ve accepted that quantum mechanics is a more fundamental version of how nature works. I know — you said this for all the right reasons, but it’s not that quantum mechanics happens at small scales. Quantum mechanics is the theory of how the world works. What happens at small scales is that classical mechanics fails. So you need quantum mechanics. Classical mechanics turns out to be a limit, an approximation, a little tiny baby version of quantum mechanics, but it’s not the fundamental one.
And since we discovered that, we have to take all of what we know about nature and fit it into this quantum mechanical framework. And we have been able to do that for literally everything we know about nature, except for gravity and curved space-time. We do not yet have a full, 100% reliable way of thinking about gravity from a quantum point of view.
Strogatz (06:24): I appreciate that correction. You’re right, I was being a little bit loose there in saying that quantum mechanics only applies at the smallest scales. I mean, there’s — on mathematical grounds, we can see how quantum mechanics becomes classical mechanics. It’s consistent with it, it’s — in fact, it implies classical mechanics, once the scale gets to be the more familiar one.
Carroll (06:45): Yeah, not only is that true, but it’s kind of crucially important, and I like to emphasize it even more than most people do, because we’re not born understanding quantum mechanics. We kind of have a much more intuitive grasp of classical mechanics. And we kind of tend to think of the world in classical terms. Classically, things have positions, and they have locations — positions and velocities. Quantum mechanically, that’s not true. And it’s really hard to wrap your brain around that. And so, we tend to speak in exactly the way that you said, like, classical mechanics works on large scales, quantum mechanics works on small scales, because we kind of don’t want to face the fact that quantum mechanics is everywhere in everything and we should learn to understand what’s going on.
Strogatz (07:28): But you say that gravity has been this kind of outlier, that it’s very hard — or at least it hasn’t been incorporated in a fully satisfactory way yet, into any kind of quantum mechanical framework. Is there a way to sum up what the nature of the difficulty is? Why is it so hard to come up with a theory that merges quantum theory and gravity?