Carroll (07:47): Yeah, there are kind of two sets of issues that come up. What you might call technical issues, and conceptual issues. We human beings start classically. When you’re a physics student as an undergraduate, and you’re learning quantum mechanics, what does that mean? That means that you’re taught the classical model for something, like a harmonic oscillator, or the hydrogen atom, or whatever. And then you’re given rules for quantizing that classical theory, okay? So there’s supposed to be, in some sense — you mathematicians out there in the audience will appreciate — a map from the space of classical theories to quantum theories, okay? The quantization procedure.
(08:26): This is all a complete fake. I mean, it sort of is a kludge that works sometimes, but this purported map from classical theories to quantum theories is not very well-defined. You can have the same classical theory that maps on to two different quantum theories. You can have two different classical theories mapping onto the same quantum theory. So, there’s no direct correspondence and after all, why should there be?
(08:46): But again, nevertheless, it has worked for electromagnetism, the nuclear forces and everything else. When you straightforwardly apply that quantization procedure to gravity — we have a classical theory, general relativity, we can quantize it. It just blows up. It just gives us infinite crazy answers.
(09:04) This has happened before in the history of trying to quantize classical theories. Richard Feynman and Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga famously won the Nobel Prize for showing how to get rid of the infinities in quantum electrodynamics. But the infinities you get in gravity are of a different character, they’re not get-rid-able, they’re not “renormalizable,” as we say. So, at a very fundamental mathy level, you know, the procedure that you were relying on all along just stalls and you don’t know what to do.
(09:35): But then there’s a whole set of more deep conceptual issues, not only do you not know what to do, you don’t know what you’re doing. Because, with everything else, every other theory other than gravity, it’s very clear what’s going on. You have stuff inside space-time. The stuff has a location, right? It has a point in space, it’s moving through time. Even if you have a field, it has a value at every point in space, etc.
But in gravity, you’re sort of combining a whole bunch of different possible geometries of space-time. And what that means is, you’re not really sure what time is, for one thing, and you’re not really sure where things are in space, because if you don’t know the geometry of space, it is impossible to identify a point in space uniquely throughout all the possible quantum combinations of the geometry of space-time. So, we really, at a fundamental level, have difficulty knowing what we’re talking about, when it comes to quantum gravity.
Strogatz (10:33): It certainly does sound very thorny, that the arena itself, like in traditional thinking, physics, as you say, there’s stuff and fields and particles and things happening, moving around from place to place, from moment to moment inside this arena of space-time. But now it’s the arena itself. Einstein already took us a little bit in that direction by making the arena a dynamical thing where space and time could warp and have, as you say, dynamics. But it’s now, it seems like it’s getting much worse.
Carroll (11:02): Well, it is, because remember, I alluded to the idea that, classically, for a particle, you have a very clear notion of where it is, its location, and how fast it’s moving. And you could measure those things. The whole spookiness of quantum mechanics is that to define what you mean by quantum mechanics, you have to use words like “observation” and “measurement.” That was never true in classical mechanics, you just measure whatever you want, it was perfectly trivial and straightforward. Quantum mechanics is a little bit different from that.
(11:03) And so, one of the lurking things here, in this whole discussion, you know, there’s many, many theoretical physicists who would say, yes, quantum gravity, very, very important, we should try to understand this. But we don’t understand quantum mechanics. Even though it’s been around for almost 100 years. We don’t agree on what quantum mechanics is saying, because of these weird words like measurement and observation. So, I tried to explain why quantum gravity is hard but I’m going to reveal my prejudices, because I can’t do that without explaining what I think quantum mechanics is. Or at least, referring to what I think quantum mechanics is.
Strogatz (11:32): So I think that segues very nicely into the next thing I was going to ask you. We’re hoping, by the end of this episode, to give people a feeling of what it means for space-time to be emergent. But what would it mean for you, or anybody studying space and time, for them to be emergent?
Carroll (12:05): So I don’t think that there is any such thing as a position or a velocity of a particle. I think those are things you observe, when you measure it, they’re possible observational outcomes, but they’re not what is — okay, they’re not what truly exists. And if you extend that to gravity, you’re saying that what we call the geometry of space-time, or things like location in space, they don’t exist. They are some approximation that you get at the classical level in the right circumstances. And that’s a very deep conceptual shift that people kind of lose their way in very quickly.
(12:58) It’s a tricky word. We have to think about it. Emergence is kind of like morality. Sometimes we agree on it when we see it. But other times, we don’t even agree on what the word is supposed to mean. So, the physicists, and mathematicians, and other natural scientists tend to — but not always — rely on what a philosopher would call weak emergence. And weak emergence is basically a convenience, in some sense. The idea is that you have a comprehensive theory, you have a theory that works at some deep level. Let’s say, the standard example is gas in a box, okay? You have a box full of some gaseous substance, and it’s made of atoms and molecules, right? And that’s the microscopic theory. And you say that, okay, I could — in principle, I could be Laplace’s demon, I could predict whatever I want, I know exactly what’s going on.