(13:47) But, we human beings, when we look at the gas in the box with our eyeballs, or our thermometers, or whatever, we don’t see each individual atom or molecule, and its position and its velocity, we see what we call coarse-grained features of the system. So we see its temperature, its density, its velocity, its pressure, things like that. And the happy news — which is not at all obvious or necessary, it’s kind of mysterious when it happens and when it doesn’t — but the happy news is that we can invent a predictive theory of what the gas is going to do just based on those coarse-grained macroscopic observables. We have fluid mechanics, right? We can model things without knowing what every atom is doing. That’s emergence, when you have a set of properties that are only approximate and coarse-grained, that you can observe at the macroscopic level, and yet you can predict with them. And weak emergence just means, there’s nothing new that happened along the way. You didn’t say that, oh, when you go to the larger scales and you zoom out, fundamentally new essences or dynamics are coming in. It’s just sort of the collective behavior of the microscopic stuff. That’s weak emergence.
(15:01) There’s also strong emergence where spooky new stuff does come in. And people talk about the necessity of that when they think about consciousness or something like that. I’m not a believer in strong emergence at the fundamental level. So, to me, what the emergence of space-time means is that space-time itself is like, the fluid mechanics. It’s like gas temperature and pressure and things like that. It’s just a coarse-grained, high-level way of thinking about something more fundamental, which we’re trying to put our finger on.
Strogatz (15:34): Wow, as you’re describing the gas in a box, I happen to be sitting in a box. I’m in a studio that is kind of box-shaped. There is a gas in here, which is the air that I’m breathing.
So anyway, yeah, very vivid to me, the example you’re talking about. And it is amazing, isn’t it? That there are laws at that collective or emergent scale that work, that don’t — you know, like thermodynamics was oblivious to statistical physics. In fact, was discovered first, and only later, the microscopic picture came out. And so, I guess you’re saying something like that would be happening now with space and time and gravity, that we have the macroscopic theory that’s Einstein’s.
Carroll (16:14): When I’m not spending my research time studying quantum mechanics and gravity, I’m studying emergence. I think that there’s a lot to be done here, to be sort of cleaned up and better understood, in a set of questions that spans from philosophy to physics to politics and economics, not to mention biology and the origin of life. So, I think that these are deep questions that we’ve been kind of messy and sloppy about addressing, but I don’t think that the emergence of space-time is difficult for that reason.
(16:45) So, when you talk about, is the United States emergent from its citizens? Or is Apple Computer Company emergent from something? Those are hard questions. Those are like, tricky, like “where do you draw the boundary?”, etc. But for space-time, I think it’s actually pretty straightforward. The lesson, the important take-home point for the podcast is, you don’t start with space-time and quantize it, okay? Just like when you have the gas in the box, you’re trying to get a better and better theory of the gas in the box, but you realize that it’s made of something fundamentally different. And I think that’s what I’m proposing, and other people are proposing for space-time as well, that the whole thing that used to work for electromagnetism and particles and the Higgs boson and the Standard Model, where you started with some stuff and quantized it, that’s not going to be the way it’s going to happen for gravity and space-time. You’re going to have something fundamentally different at the deep micro-level, and then you’re going to emerge into what we know of as space-time.
Strogatz (17:46): Shouldn’t we start talking about entanglement, at this point, maybe?
Carroll (17:49): Never too early to start talking about entanglement.
Strogatz (17:51): Let’s talk about it. What is it? I hear it a lot. I hear quantum people talking about it. Nowadays, especially, with quantum computing, we keep hearing about entanglement. Why don’t you just start with telling us what it means, where the idea came from?
Carroll (18:04): Yeah, I mean, let’s think about the Higgs boson. We discovered it a few years ago, it’s a real particle, and I wrote a book about it, The Particle at the End of the Universe. The Higgs boson — one of the reasons why it’s hard to detect is that it decays. It has a very, very short lifetime, right? So, you can imagine if someone put a Higgs boson right in front of you, it would generally decay into other particles in about one zeptosecond. That’s 10-21 seconds. Very, very quickly.
(18:31) One thing it can do, it can decay into an electron and a positron, an antielectron. So it can decay into two particles, electron and positron. Now remember quantum mechanics. So, you can predict roughly how long it will take the Higgs boson to decay, but when it spits out that electron and positron, you can’t predict the direction in which they’re going to move.
(18:54) I mean, that makes perfect sense because the Higgs boson itself is just a point. It has no directionality in space. So there’s some probability of seeing the electron, in a cloud chamber or whatever, moving in whatever direction you want. Likewise, for the positron, there’s some probability, seeing it moving in whatever direction you want. But you want momentum to be conserved. So you don’t want the Higgs boson sitting there, stationary, to decay into an electron and a positron both moving rapidly in the same direction. That would be a shift in the momentum, right?
(19:26) So, even though you don’t know what direction the electron is going to move in, and you don’t know what direction the positron is going to move in — sorry, I’m already, I’m being, I’m being the person who I make fun of, I’m speaking as if these are real. Even though you don’t know what direction you will measure the electron to be moving in, and you don’t know what direction you will measure the positron to be moving in, you know that if you measure them both, they will be back to back. Because they need to have equal and opposite momentum, for those to cancel out.
(19:54) So what that means is, if you believe all those things, right away, this is why we believe there’s only one wavefunction for the combined system of the electron and the positron. It’s not an independent question, what direction are you going to measure the electron in? What direction are you going to measure the positron in? It’s a statement you need to ask at the same time. That’s entanglement, right there. Entanglement is the fact that you cannot separately and independently predict what the observational outcome is going to be for the electron and the positron.
(20:26) And this is completely generic and everywhere in quantum mechanics. It’s not a rare, special thing. Many things are entangled with many other things. It’s the unique and fun and very useful time when things are not entangled with each other. It took a long time — like, Einstein and his friends — Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, EPR — published a paper in 1935 that really pointed out the significance of entanglement. Because it was sort of there, already, implicit in the equations, but no one had really shone a flashlight on it, and that’s what Einstein did. And the reason why it bothered him is because when that Higgs boson decays and the positron and the electron move off in opposite directions, you can wait a long time, let’s say you wait a few years before you measure what direction the electron is moving in.
(21:14) So, both particles are very, very far away from each other. And now when you measure the location of one, supposedly the location of the other one is instantly determined. And there’s no limit of the speed of light or anything like that. So for obvious reasons, Einstein, very fond at the speed of light as a limit on things, he didn’t like that. He never really quite thought that that was the final answer, he was always searching for something better.
Strogatz (21:39): And the argument goes nowadays that it’s okay, it’s no violation of special relativity, because you can’t use this to transfer any information or something? Is that the statement?
Carroll (21:39): Yeah, well, you know, there’s, there’s a whole bunch of statements that one can make. But the one that we absolutely think is true, is the one that you just made. If you imagine these two particles moving back-to-back, and one person detects one, and there’s another one, you know, a light-year away, who’s going to detect the other one, the point is that they don’t know what your measurement outcome is, you would have to tell them.
So even though in the global point of view, now, the location where the other particle is going to be detected is known to God, or to the universe, it is not known to any particular person sitting at any location within the universe. It takes the speed of light time to take a signal that would let you know that there is some now new fact about the matter, where you’re going to observe the positron. So, you cannot actually use this for signaling, you just don’t know what has happened when your other observer has measured something. And you can actually prove that, under reasonable assumptions, in the theory as we know it.
(22:43) So it seems as if this is the tension, that the way the universe works involves correlations that travel faster than the speed of light, but in some well-defined sense, information does not travel faster than the speed of light. That should worry you, that we didn’t define any of these words. So you know, what does that mean? You’re not going to build a transporter beam or anything like that out of this stuff.
(23:09) But — but let me just add one other thought, which I think, again, is a result of my quirky way of thinking about these things, which is not entirely standard, which is, people really like locality. Like, locality is a central thing. Locality is just the idea that if I poke the universe at one point in space-time, the effects of that poke will happen at that point, and then they will ripple out. But they will ripple out to other points no faster than the speed of light, okay? There’s nothing I can do to poke the universe here that will change the state of the universe in a tangible way very, very far away. And you can see how this entanglement thing is kind of on the boundary of that, like, the description of the universe changes instantly far away, but no information is traveling.
(23:51) So then, if you believe that locality is fundamental like that, then you’re sort of asking this question, why does the universe almost violate that but seem to not quite? That’s the puzzle that we have. And this is — a lot of ink has been spilled in the foundations of quantum mechanics.
(24:06) I think about it entirely the other way around, because I think of the wavefunction as the fundamental thing, right? I think that’s what exists in reality. And the wavefunction, like the wavefunction of this positron and electron is utterly nonlocal. It just exists all — it’s a, it’s a feature of the universe as a whole right from the start. So, I also have a mystery to be explained, but my mystery is the opposite way. It’s not “why is locality approximately or, you know, seemingly violated by entanglement?” It’s “why is there locality at all?” Like, that’s the puzzle to me.
